A trial or something.
You say that every time you come here.
It's not very royal suddenly.
I see you.
We're a gentle lot.
We're in the jail, and I'm-
Oh, hello
... here for intimidation.
It's been rough in here today.
God.
Covered in bruises.
Steve's not here now, so you're all right.
Yeah. Mop that off the- No more pics. No more photos.
Yes.
Haven't Rachel, Rachel, right.
And that Matt Tanner's holding him up the whole time.
May. Yeah.
I haven't got any details, just the reports and-
Okay. So if you want to make some brief introductory remarks, that would be great.
And, then I'm sure we'll have a few questions for
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to the committee.
I'm sure you both know, you all know, Ray and Julie probably
better than your own spouses at this stage.
But yeah, I welcome the opportunity to come before the committee.
It has been a stellar year for our rural communities.
Record product prices,
broad based across the primary sector,
with a couple of,
exceptions in arable and maybe vegetables as well.
But,
I think anyone, all of us were at the field days, and we
would've seen nothing but a buoyant
farming and rural communities on the front foot in that
63 billion export forecast
is a shot in the arm for not only our rural communities,
but for New Zealand as a whole.
However, the year has not been
without its challenges.
A record number of states of emergency,
and fuel prices which have disproportionately affected rural New
Zealand.
The rural... Most of you have had to suffer through one of my presentations
before, but the rural communities portfolio is an
advocacy role within government.
We oversee the rural proofing
policy within government.
And rural communities are much broader, we look upon as a much broader lens
than just farming and agricultural related
matters.
Thriving rural communities have a
good breadth of
people living in them, and that's what we want.
We want to be able to retain and attract people into our rural communities.
So my core philosophy through this has been to look at what I think
the key drivers are
from a government point of view,
and the key services which I have judged to be
primary healthcare,
a good standard of education, connectivity,
and a law and order presence.
Of course, we deal with things over a much broader scope.
This year the Office of Rural Communities I think dealt with
61 policies,
engagements and cabinet papers,
as well as proactively engaging across agencies to make sure
that they're considering rural in their policy development.
Just two or three areas I'd like to highlight.
We've been active in emergency management, both
in the response and the recovery, but also in helping to
shape the legislation, which is going to have a much greater emphasis on
rural voices in those responses,
and pleased at the field days to see the announcement around the
funding for Taskforce Kiwi
and the rural advisory groups that play such
a critical role in our response and recoveries.
One of the driest and most unsung things that we have
done, without a doubt, or are doing,
is around rural statistics.
Every government department
classifies rural differently.
We're trying to standardize that,
and have pushed that issue. Minister Rete has
been sympathetic to that when he was in the portfolio, now picked
up by Minister Simpson. But our office is working very closely with his
office in doing that, and that's really important because this place
works on statistics, and if we're going to get a fair share of funding, we need to
be categorized appropriately.
And I'm closely monitoring the rural connectivity
issue and the shutdown-
Yes
... of the 3G.
And just before I finish, Madam Chair, because I can feel your burning glare.
It's great to see wool taking off,
genuine lifts in the rural wool prices have been
long-awaited.
Yeah
That return to natural fibers. We've got an innovative pipeline of new
products and users coming on board.
And very, very grateful for the investment that
NPI have put in at the field days to the wool
source
pigments, particles and powders, which is the
game changer, potentially something that can take wool into a very high value
space and do so at scale. So,
with that, Madam Chair, I'll hand it back to you.
Fantastic. Right. I think we have a question from Dan first.
Yeah. Thank you, Chair. And-
Spot
... thank you, Minister. Also, thanks to the team who are accompanying you today.
This is my first scrutiny week, and in past transcripts, I note that
you've mentioned that your role is largely one of advocacy.
Some of the questions are along those lines today, and how that's
reflected in the budget.
Minister, I'm just keen to go through with a rural health line of questioning
first, given it's something that both of us get feedback on, on a regular
basis Across our communities. Horoua Taiwhenua
Rural Health Network have said recently that health policy
and funding decisions made without meaningful rural engagement have
widened the gap between policy intent and the realities of rural
life, and that rural communities know what works, but
for too long, decisions have been made without rural voices at the
table.
Do you agree with Horoua Taiwhenua that for too long,
decisions have been made without rural voices at the table?
And if so, what specific health organizations did you
consult with in the development of the budget?
Well,
for too long, yes. Under this government, no.
Yes.
I think we've been very
active in trying to lift the fortunes of rural health, and I've
worked quite closely with Matt Doocey as our
Rural Health
Minister.
And
it was probably before your time, but this time last year, we went out, we
did 13 rural road shows around
the country. We actually sat in the room and it wasn't so much
that Matt and I were there, but we took the Wellington leadership out
with us to hear firsthand what those challenges were, and they are
great. When I went through that list of key government services, it became
clear to me right at the start that health was the one that was the most
under pressure, and we're not going to turn
that around overnight. In terms of the budgetary stuff as
part of your... It's primarily a workforce question.
Ultimately, that's the real guts of it, I guess.
And we've got a
large number of new nurses and doctors into the system, but getting them into
rural is a challenge.
I'm really proud of the Rural Wellbeing Fund that we announced,
and there's 18 community organizations that have
benefited from that. You'll see us, just
recently, a couple of weeks ago, we announced the third of our rural
training hubs in Greymouth.
I think following on from Wairarapa and Hawera.
We've got a capitation review underway at the moment
for rural GPs, and
that's been a vexed issue for a long
period of time. But for the first time, rurality is going to
be
a factor in how they allocate funding for GPs.
So that
will be a big step forward. And of course,
the Waikato Medical School is the medium
term solution to a lot of our workforce
issues. I'll be honest with you, I started off a bit of
a doubting Thomas whether that was, why couldn't we
do, just up the numbers in
Otago and Auckland. But-
And it worked
... Well, that's a good question, Scott. They had failed.
They were getting
placements out, but the reality was that they weren't ending up
in rural practice.
Oh, okay. They weren't going to Wellington .
There was
people going and dipping their toes-
Yeah
... but the
amount coming out the other end
was negligible, certainly negligible in regard to the
size of the workforce we need.
We are going to be specifically targeting
rural people and training them for rural.
So, it is quite a different model. Once I've got my head around it,
worked out why the current system wasn't working, and I'm
from Otago too, Scott, I was like, "Really?
Are we going to
help the Chiefs?" But-
Right
... but I have become quite a convert, and I think it's a model that's worked well
in Australia, and I think we've done well to pick it up.
No worries.
You've got a sup.
I do have one sup.
Yes.
It's based around our Horoua Taiwhenua Q&A that we had-
Yes
... a couple of weeks ago.
Given the government has endorsed that strategic direction of
Aotearoa New Zealand's declaration on rural health,
what declaration priority areas received new
funding through the budget? And this isn't intended to be a pop quiz,
by the way. I just want to get a sense of where you see the money going
into for rural health, and particularly, those six areas that they
really were pushing us on
about two months ago.
It is a pop quiz. But, well, these
are fiscally constrained times, but the one thing that we are making sure that
we're lifting our funding for is in the health, and
the health budget was significantly
increased.
The rural health strategy is a really good development
that was brought in under the last government.
And Horoua Taiwhenua hold us to that.
They're expecting
perfection, I guess, rightly, but it takes a long time to
turn the ship around. But we are trying to get more money in the front end,
and listening very carefully to our rural communities and what they need.
Thank you. Excellent. Scott.
Yeah. So my question is also on the health side.
Because we've got government putting money into frontline
health. How will the government ensure that rural patients see
improved access to GPs and after-hours care
and specialist access?
Well, we have put extra money into
after-hours care in rural. I think that was in the last budget, so
there was $150 million from... I'm just, that's off
the top of my head. So, we have recognized that
after-hours care
is lacking in many areas.
Um
Yeah. It's a work in progress, but as I say, we're continuing to put more money in,
and the more money we put in, the more we can continue to roll out these
services.
And a sup on that. You're probably aware
that Wānaka Health Rural has been
reclassified as a first-tier rural area because of an increased population.
Yeah.
But it doesn't have a hospital,
and as a consequence, it's going to lose something like 70% of its
funding for general practices if that change
goes ahead. So we've got a
rural
practice, rural practices that are going to have a
decline of service to a large rural area, and it's quite a complex area
because it's got a lot of farming, it's also got tourism, it's
got the itinerant workforce that come in and
adventure sports, which results in a lot of
challenges that rural GPs really do need funding for.
And at the moment, they are seeing a cut in funding,
seeing a cut coming.
Yeah. And I think that has
received
such enormous population growth, and it is quite isolated even though
it has got a good population base. So I think you would've seen that that
decision's being reviewed in light of the fact that they are being
significantly impacted. Actually, the blood testing,
this is an example of going out to Wānaka
and doing one of the rural health roadshows.
One of the issues that came up was their access to blood testing,
and
we've specifically put some extra funding in there to
take care of that. So we're trying to be as responsive as we can, but
every time these decisions get made to--
with allocations, there's
ultimately some winners and losers, and you hear a lot from the losers.
But I think it was recognized in this case that that was a
special case and needed review.
Tina's got a sup.
Well, I've got a sup, a little bit along the same lines as you, Scott,
around the funding formula for rural health.
When it comes to practices in rural
towns-
Mm
... that have a large proportion of their people who come from the rural inland,
but they are classified as an urban medical center because they're in town.
Mm.
But a lot of their issues are rural-based
issues, and the funding formula penalizes them as a
result of them being-
Is that part of a similar conversation, or is there something that can be
reviewed in that?
Was that-
That's slightly
out. I think Scott was talking about general practice and-
Well, this is a general practice.
Yeah.
Primary health. Primary health medical center-
With a-
... with doctors
With a rural hospital, you're talking about?
No. Doesn't have a rural hospital.
It's just
GPs-
Yeah
... on site.
Yeah.
In a building. But the building's in town. They have 20,000 patients.
That's their book.
Yeah.
More than half would be from
rural around them, a long way out of town.
Yeah.
But they are classed as urban.
In Belie, is that right?
Yeah.
So they don't get the full quantum. It helps them get across the line.
Yeah. So that'll be part of the review that they're
doing to the capitation rates, which
rurality is going to be factored in there, so and
my expectation-
Yes, but the point being, Minister, that
they might be classed as urban, when actually their patient
base is rural-
Yeah
... because of where the building sits.
Yeah. And that'll be a part of how we-
Okay. That's all
... undertake that review.
I'll leave it with you to-
Talk to Simon.
Oh, we have.
Okay. Oh, have you a sup?
Yes. So
one of the other features of Wānaka, or all rural communities generally
actually, that a quarter of people over 65
live in rural communities. But we know there's a real problem with geriatric
care in Wānaka in particular because many people
retire out of Dunedin and Auckland to Wānaka.
There's not a lot of support. There's a real concern that there's not the
support for geriatric care in that
Wānaka area. What are your thoughts about how
you can increase support for a community, a growing
community, but with risk of
losing
health rather than gaining for its more complex needs?
I don't want to speculate on what the ...
That's not an issue I've been engaged with.
I do know my colleague Casey Casello, as Minister for
Seniors, has just released an updated strategy around
aged care.
So
I assume it's involved in that, but it's not something I've had anything
to do with.
Well, if I could just-
Very quick sup because-
Very quick
... we've only got the minister for a short period today.
Okay. So the other aspect of that, of course, is transport.
We've got these isolated communities.
We've got Queenstown, Wānaka, that-
That's a new-
... going 12-bed hospital at Queenstown and Wānaka.
When there's a birth complication or something, they need to fly to
Invercargill or Dunedin.
What's the solution for rural transport
for our rural communities when we just
don't have the services rural?
Well, that's not a new issue. I mean,
the-
It's not a new issue, no. That's right. It's a problem, though.
That's a problem that's been expressed by the health
providers in Queenstown and in Wānaka
Where they want to see more health services provided there,
so that they can service their communities rather than at risk.
And we are. There's $150 million going
into the
Queenstown
area.
Yeah.
That was announced
two or three months ago
to upgrade their facilities. Because you're right, the
population base to their
healthcare provision and plus with all the tourists in town, it is
very challenged. But there has been
an uplift in funding for that area to try to start to address that
issue.
Thank you. Right. We've got a new question from Laura.
Thank you, Chair. It's great to see the announcement at Fieldays
around Taskforce Kiwi getting some funding, because I've been out in the
communities, particularly rural communities, with a lot of those states of
emergencies that have been happening.
How much is the amount that's been allocated, and what
exactly is it for, and is it an ongoing
contribution, or is it just a time limit thing?
It's $50,000. Is that it
based on?
That's one year funding, yeah.
One year funding at this stage, yeah.
So as you know, Laura, I totally
agree with you. They're filling a gap in our
response. We actually have
community groups like the Rural Support Trust and that, that deal with the
psychosocial side of things. But actually sometimes you
just need someone to get out there on a chainsaw or on a digger and
filling that role. So it's for administration and
when they came into... And I think you
led that
evening. That's what they were asking for.
They were asking for some money to help with their administration so they could
organize their volunteers.
So this is co-funding. It's not the total amount they're after, but it's a
step in the right direction. I understand they're very pleased with
it.
I think we had a sup from Dan.
Yeah, just off the back of emergency management.
So we've got the Emergency Management Bill-
Mm
... that's just been returned, and there's a bit of an opportunity there
with your role.
Particularly with it being an enabler in supporting regional
emergency management plans, not necessarily enshrined in the
legislation, but linking rural stakeholders with councils
and feeding emerging issues back up to Wellington.
And I think that would really augment efforts to help our rural
communities prepare. And I was just wondering if you see any
opportunities in that space.
Yeah. Well, the rural advisory groups, who
are the
collection of rural leaders that come together alongside MPI, Zonnefarm Support
team, and the Beef and Lambs, and the local councils,
Dairynz, FedFarmers, that sort of thing.
So there's some Ray might like to illuminate, but
it's for professional development a little bit,
where there are essentially voluntary groups coming
together in times of stress. So it's about giving them a
little... As I understand it, Ray, is that a good characterization of how that
will... Karen maybe-
Karen might be,
yeah.
Hi.
Hi. It's to provide some
funding for the rural advisory groups across the country,
so they'll each have access to about
$10,000 each to assist with planning
that they need to undertake. And obviously with El Niño
coming towards us, as is forecast, it will provide some
really useful resource
to assist with
regional priorities that they need to plan for.
Thank you.
Well, actually, okay, you go and then I'll go.
Yeah. No, thank you. I want to change topic
a little bit.
Right.
Thinking about wilding pines, we've got
a chunk that's been thrown in just prior to the budget being
announced.
Just one.
And how much funding was requested by the wilding
conifer control, for wilding conifer control and wilding pine
controlled by local councils and by the wilding
pine network. How much-
Yeah
... discrepancy is there between what's been provided and what was
sought?
It's pretty close now, I think.
Just from memory,
because the uplift,
I think the uplift of 79 million across that period on
top of what was already in the evidence is pretty close, I think, to
what was being asked, but it's a little bit shorter, I think, than
what they were originally seeking.
But
it
gives us the opportunity to attack pretty much all of the areas that we have been
identifying as being either left,
where there's maintenance now being deferred on earlier work or to
start in areas,
in that Molesworth area that hadn't been tackled before because it's just so large.
So
I think the good thing about their program as well is
sometimes programs take a while to get up and going.
That's a program where the providers are there, the people know how to get on and
do it. It's really been just the shortage of cash.
So I'm feeling confident. So I think the challenge is
going to be get in and make progress there and then demonstrate what's possible and
then hopefully keep that funding stream going, see if we can get enough to be able
get as far as we can.
So-
Yes
... yeah. So my understanding is that they've asked for 50 million per
annum to make progress, and which is not quite where we're-
No, we don't think you need that much.
And well-
To be frank
... having been through Molesworth and seen the extent of the challenge, and the
Mackenzie, and around Queenstown-
It is big and we can't afford to let this get away.
No, but it's a massive uprush on their reports.
If you think about all the things that we've been talking about here that need
funding, this thing here is getting a big chunk of funding.
And so I think we're going from a $12 million base
to closer to 30
to 35 million
per annum. That's massive uplift.
So I guess the question is- ... we're going
to have to have some trade-offs. This is what we've been told from
the groups that work.
Where do you see those trade-offs?
Are we going to focus on high country farming
areas, conservation land, the water catchments, because we know
that the pines-
Yes, by the way, if-
... really suck up water-
Yeah
... or rural communities. What's the priority?
Well, I don't know, Ray. That's a good question.
All of the above.
No.
Well, I can just say, Minister, that plan's been put together at the moment for the
Biosecurity Minister. So,
you're right. We do have to make sure we target...
So we're going to target some areas that have been heavily publicized where there
hasn't been any action, like in that Branch Lytham area and others,
which is a feed source probably across that Moss Smith area.
There's some areas further down south as well.
There'll be some bits in the North Island, too.
Sure.
So what we'll do is we'll put up a plan to the Minister and then
agree there and then see how we go with that.
But I think the
difficulty with the topic is-
... you can't just
give everybody everything they want.
This is a massive
uplift. If I think about the
computational funding,
for us to have got an $80 million uplift in wilding pine funding
is going to get us a really long way.
Although maybe the challenge then is to actually prove that we can actually clean
these areas up in a dusk return.
Yeah. It comes under the problem.
Okay.
I just can't-
Well, there's only one. With the funding, it was always time limited.
It was never... The problem with the increase in funding was the increase in
funding was a good idea, but the problem is if you make increases in funding time
limited, when you've got long-term problems, then you eventually go over a
cliff.
Yeah.
And that's what happened with the funding.
Okay. Joe's got a very quick sup and then I want to answer.
A very quick sup.
Ray,
the 50 million a year was
raised by Scott, and you said you don't think we need that much.
How much do you think is-
Well, I think we're quite close to what-
Yeah
... is reasonable for we actually tackle.
Yeah.
I think it will still be a residual issue.
And I think we'll want to come back on that.
Okay.
But I think we've got enough now to really eat into this, and then collective--
I think everyone here actually agrees we should solve this.
Mm-hmm.
There's no real argument about that.
Yeah.
But it'll probably give us enough information to actually figure out how close we
are to being able to do it.
Thank you.
But I think
what we have to be careful about, I think collectively on funding paths
going forward is, where you've got long-term problems and you slug a vast amount
of money in,
and then it goes over a cliff, what you end up with is people
being annoyed at the end of it
because the money's not there anymore. But it was never, ever going to be there.
So just a closing comment on that. This overwhelmingly
a good news story. It is a hell of a challenge, and one
we do have to get on top of.
We're showing some urgency. I know from my
feed into the budget, and alas, I don't have
any budget of my own, but in terms of the feedback I gave to
what our priority should be,
the two things were wilding pines and catchment groups.
Mm-hmm.
And we managed to reprioritize some money significantly to
both those, which I think is fantastic.
Okay. I've got a question. Thank you.
First of all, I just wanted to say thank you very much for your work on wool,
because it's been outstanding and really well-received by the community and
certainly by the farming community.
It's now a profit-making exercise for most farmers as opposed to being an animal
health cost. So, yeah, it's a real credit to you sir and the government, so thank
you very much. I want to talk about connectivity.
So my main priority is not so much broadband or internet
connectivity at home, but cellphone connectivity on the roads, because so many of
our people depend on it, whether it's stock truck drivers, stock
agents, people. We spend more time in our cars, and anecdotally, it is
getting worse.
Mm-hmm.
And we've got all these acronyms that get government funding that I'm not sure it
actually trickles down to where it needs.
But I just wonder if there is a plan or if there is any
future investment in building new towers.
And the other thing is the resilience when there's a weather event.
Mm-hmm.
That the battery life is only four hours, and as we were just
discussing it before you arrived, that usually the power goes off at night,
and so by the time you wake up in the morning, you haven't got any.
And in the old days, we had landlines, so at least you could still connect with
people or talk to people. But now you're just completely isolated,
and you've often got animals. You're dealing with live animals.
And so I just want two, couple of strands to that, and you've got about
three minutes.
Is it a question or a rant?
Well, it's a little bit of a rant, but a question, too.
So is there any more money to put more towers so that we've got
connectivity on the roads?
Well-
And don't tell me we're just relying on Mr.
Matt-
You need to ask-
... because I don't have faith in that
... Kelvin that. But, yeah, right to...
Because
I know that the telcos,
we've been briefed and
through MBIE that
the change over to 4G has been seamless and everyone's
happy. Which there is a big delta between that and what I'm hearing
out around rural New Zealand.
Oh, it's pretty-
So we've got the telcos coming in shortly.
Actually been working with Federated Farmers, and they're actually
about to do a survey on it because the-
We can have frustration, but how many people actually
go onto the website and complain that...
So we've actually got to feed the information in, so there's an onus on
us a little bit too, to make sure that we are being quite specific
about where hotspots or black spots are.
But yeah, the soothing sounds coming from the telcos
on this, it don't match up what I'm hearing out on the ground.
Mm.
So we are keeping a very close eye on this, yeah.
One thing I would like to suggest if you are meeting with them is that their
maps that they have-
Mm
... are not accurate.
Mm.
So they think, for example, I can get from Whanganui to Palmerston
North, more or less a flat piece of road, State Highway 3, they say there are no
black spots on that road. Well, I can tell you there are at least six.
It's just shocking.
Yeah. And even from Sanson down State Highway 1 into
Wellington, and that's not even counting Transmission Gully, depending on what time
of day you travel on it. But,
I
think one thing that would be great would be to get them to update their maps so
they actually know where the problems are, because their maps aren't correct.
Yeah.
They should just send them to the MPs and they'll tell them.
And I've
heard Laura talk about Starlink, and I think there's a
real danger here that we think Starlink's going to solve all our problems.
It's not. No.
And I think we've actually collectively pulled back from
investment or requiring investment.
However, whatever levers we've got to pull, because the
job's not done. In fact, it's actually getting worse at the moment in areas.
Oh, thank you for acknowledging that. I really appreciate it.
I've got to read this book.
Right. Very quick, Scott.
Yeah. So field days, we heard from ECIP that the
Solar on Schools program, Solar on Farms
program was massively oversubscribed within a week, and they were
going to open it for six weeks. Within a week, they had more than
225 applicants from farms, and they only had 40 spaces.
So they closed it off within four weeks, and they had even more.
Will you advocate, as someone who's keen on farm electrification,
will you be advocating for much greater investment
into the Solar on Farms program? The
government might be able to find something that's slipped down the back of Shane's
limousine or somewhere.
Well, I don't think it requires a sub-- I am an
advocate for this out, not only for-
Subsidy
... economic purposes or environmental purposes, but resilience purposes,
as we know
in weather events and what I'm hearing in presentations I've seen when I've
been at solar conferences, Scott, is the
payback's between three and five years.
So I don't know that this is,
if you're talking about we're going to put money into welding pines or subsidizing
solar, I think, that's clear where our priorities should be.
It's not subsidizing, it's supporting people moving into
solar. So that's what the program is doing. It's supporting people.
It's not necessarily subsidizing.
Yeah. Well, there's a lot of program, the Farmlands, everyone's a member of
Farmlands out in the
Farmers, so there's plenty of programs out there, so very
supportive of it. But I think there's probably
areas that are far higher priority for the government
where the private sector isn't actually delivering, that we do
need to offer some assistance.
Right. We've reached time. Thank you very much, Minister. That was great.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Thanks, Julie. Thanks, Ray.
Oh, it's not bad, was it? Thank you.
Well, yours was the hardest question.
Feel like I had more. Where'd they come from?
There's self-irony through this, because I drive through there quite a bit and it's
bloody awful.
Hearable.
It's not hidden. Yeah.
On another note, though.
Sorry. Wairaka. Zalt. Doesn't matter what you do.
State Highway 5.
Yeah.
State Highway 5 has improved, though.
I'm sorry, anyone been to visit Pat?